---
title: "Civic Switchboard: Call for Participation"
description: Vegas Workshop Call for Participation
header: "Civic Switchboard Workshop: Call for Participation"
---


Civic Switchboard is an [Institute of Museum and Library Services](https://www.imls.gov/) supported effort that aims to develop the capacity of academic and public libraries in civic data ecosystems. Learn more about the project at our [website](https://civic-switchboard.github.io/).   


We are happy to announce that we are now accepting submissions for our second workshop!
This workshop will take place before the [Digital Library Federation (DLF)](https://www.diglib.org/) forum, on October 14th held outside of Las Vegas, NV. 

#### Information about eligibility and submission guidelines can be found in our [application](https://goo.gl/forms/FFtyGKvV0ZH1JZ6A2).

*Note: a copy of the application questions can be found at the end of this post*
  
This workshop will bring together ten regional teams of two to explore the potential for partnerships of libraries and civic data intermediaries. Each team will include one library worker and one non-library civic data intermediary. Teams will learn to incubate new local data partnerships, get a better handle on their civic data ecosystem, and learn from innovative peers across the country. 

If selected to attend, your team will receive a $1,500 stipend to cover travel and other expenses.  

**We are also offering a limited number of complimentary conference registrations for the library partner on the team to stay on for the DLF Forum and act as a cross-pollinator.**



Please  [email](mailto:civic-switchboard@pitt.edu) us with any questions.  If you haven’t already, please subscribe to [our newsletter](https://civicswitchboard.us17.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=530c4fdb234145e8e1e6b5307&id=3ae069cc9d) to receive updates and find us on [twitter](https://twitter.com/civicswitch)! 

  
---    
**Applications Due: Wednesday, July 11th, 2018 EST 5 PM**  
**Teams Notified by: August 1st, 2018**  

**Application Questions (250 word limit per question):**   
*Answers must be submitted through the [application](https://goo.gl/forms/SxjfR1Y8PI6fZgX42).*  
* Please share why is this workshop interesting to your team.
* Please describe your existing engagement with civic data.  You can include collaboration between your organizations (if applicable) or engagement as individual organizations.  
* Please describe directions for collaborative work that your team has discussed.
* In addition to the two people who would attend the workshop, are there other positions/departments/divisions in your organizations who will be involved in this partnership?
* Please briefly describe some of the other people or groups -- formal or informal -- who help your community access and use civic data   (we’re calling this the civic data ecosystem).  If you don’t know or there isn’t a lot going on - that is ok.  Just tell us what you know! 
* In your dream world, what roles would the library play in your civic data ecosystem? 
* Cross-Pollinator Question - Please tell us what your team hopes to gain by having your non-library civic data partner attend the DLF Forum. 

We may use your application responses to help our project team identify trends and learn about what is already happening between libraries and civic data intermediaries. We may share aggregated information from across all applications in public reports, but we won’t share any direct quotes from your application or identify your organization or city without receiving separate permission from you first.
